Docs: security modes (#2060)
liqotech/liqo: docs/usage/security-modes.md

# Security modes

> This section describes the different **Security mode** options for connectivity that can be selected for Liqo, regulating connectivity restriction for intra-cluster traffic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section describes the connectivity **security modes** available in Liqo, to manage the connectivity restriction for intra-cluster traffic.
```

## Overview

> Actually, Liqo provides two security modes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, Liqo provides two security modes:
```

> * **Full pod-to-pod connectivity**: represents the native behaviour of Liqo, there are no restriction in terms of connectivity, and all pods of the first cluster can connect to all pods of the second cluster (and vice versa).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Full pod-to-pod connectivity**: this is the default mode, there are no restriction in terms of connectivity, and all pods of the local cluster can connect to all pods of the remote cluster (and vice versa). This mode can be used when the clusters are trusted each other (and/or belog to the same administrative domain) and there is no need to restrict the connectivity.
```

> * **Intra-cluster traffic segregation**: full pod-to-pod connectivity is enabled only within real clusters; regarding intra-cluster traffic, local cluster has the possibility to contact only its offloaded pods, while remote cluster is allowed to contact exclusively services offloaded on it

Reviewer: * **Intra-cluster traffic segregation**: the full pod-to-pod connectivity is allowed only within physical cluster, while in the intra-cluster traffic, the local cluster can contact only its offloaded pods, while the remote cluster is allowed to contact exclusively the services offloaded on it. This mode can be used when the local cluster aims to limit the remote cluster's connectivity solely to offloaded services, preventing direct interaction with the offloaded pods.

> * **Intra-cluster traffic segregation**: full pod-to-pod connectivity is enabled only within real clusters; regarding intra-cluster traffic, local cluster has the possibility to contact only its offloaded pods, while remote cluster is allowed to contact exclusively services offloaded on it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Intra-cluster traffic segregation**: the full pod-to-pod connectivity is allowed only within physical cluster, while in the intra-cluster traffic, the local cluster can contact only its offloaded pods, while the remote cluster is allowed to contact exclusively the services offloaded on it. This mode can be used when the local cluster aims to limit the remote cluster's connectivity solely to offloaded services, preventing direct interaction with the offloaded pods.
```

## Selection of the Security mode

The desired Security mode can be selected with a **feature flag** at install time (see the [reference](/installation/install.md)):

> * `--set networking.securityMode=FullPodToPod` to select **full pod-to-pod connectivity (default mode)**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `--set networking.securityMode=FullPodToPod` to select **full pod-to-pod connectivity** (default mode)
```

* `--set networking.securityMode=IntraClusterTrafficSegregation` to select **intra-cluster traffic segregation**

```{admonition} Note

> Currently, the selection of security mode is possible only at installation time. In future, this feature will be extended to be configured at run-time, e.g., each time you setup a new peering.

Reviewer 2: To me this looks fair, unless the peering-based configuration requires a minimal effort to be implemented.
However, with the current refactoring of the network, next version should support peer-based configuration.

```

> ## Connectivity matrix

Reviewer 2: When introducing the pictures, we have to define clearly all the components in there.
E.g., what are "clusters", what is a "virtual cluster", what is "I1" and "I2", and so on. We cannot give for granted that readers know what we have in mind.

> To better explain security modes, schemas of possible Liqo topologies and relative traffic matrices are provided in the following.

Reviewer 2: Personally, I would move the pictures within each scenario. I feel confusing to explain each scenario in a few sentences, then having to scroll down the page till the end to reach the precise definition of the rule, with picture and table.

<details>
<summary>Full pod-to-pod connectivity</summary>
<IMG src="/_static/images/usage/security-modes/full_p2p.svg"/>
</details>

<details>

> <summary>Intra-cluster traffic segregation</summary>

Reviewer 3: If you can, use Markdown syntax instead of HTML. If markdown doesn't work, please leave a comment.

```{admonition} Note
Yellow cells in the table highlights the differences compared to the default mode (i.e., full pod-to-pod connectivity).
```

> <blockquote>

Reviewer 2: Here we're using a different terminology than before. Here we say "Offloaded pods", "Offloaded service", "Complete scenario". Before, we used "Full pod-to-pod" and "Intra-cluster traffic segregation". Please use the same terminology or clarify what you had in mind.

Author: These three pictures are all related to intra-cluster traffic segrgation mode; I would include them because, on one hand, I believe it could be useful to see two separate examples that demonstrate the two types of traffic that the feature allows, making it clear through the summary example and/or in another way that with this security mode, you cannot select only one of them. On the other hand, I think that a page with 3 consecutive images and 3 consecutive tables is not user-friendly at all, and perhaps the explanation of the security mode with just the summary example manages to be explanatory. What do you think?

    <details>
    <summary>Offloaded pods</summary>
    <IMG src="/_static/images/usage/security-modes/traffic_seg_off_pods.svg"/>
    </details>
    <details>
    <summary>Offloaded service</summary>
    <IMG src="/_static/images/usage/security-modes/traffic_seg_off_svc.svg"/>
    </details>
    <details>
    <summary>Complete scenario</summary>
    <IMG src="/_static/images/usage/security-modes/traffic_seg_complete.svg"/>
    </details>
</blockquote>

> </details>

Reviewer 3: Same here.

> </details>

Reviewer: If you can, use Markdown tables instead of images.

Author: With Markdown tables, I wouldn't have the possibility to insert the arrow indicating the direction of connectivity in the top-right corner, without which the matrix is not correctly understandable.

Reviewer 4: What about using Unicode characters ↱ (U+21B1) or ⬈ (U+2B08)?

Using the same rules and conventions already presented for the previous case (_full pod-to-pod_ connectivity), the following figure and table presents the connectivity provided by Liqo in this case:

[FRANCESCO: perche' qui ci sono 3 immagini?]

```{figure} /_static/images/usage/security-modes/traffic_seg_off_pods.svg
---
align: center
---
Intra-cluster traffic segregation scenario with only offloaded pods
```

```{figure} /_static/images/usage/security-modes/traffic_seg_off_svc.svg
---
align: center
---
Intra-cluster traffic segregation scenario with only offloaded service
```

```{figure} /_static/images/usage/security-modes//traffic_seg_complete.svg
---
align: center
---
Intra-cluster traffic segregation complete scenario 
```

## Selection of the security mode

> The desired security mode can be selected with an **Helm value** at install time (see the [reference](/installation/install.md)):

Reviewer 2: Ma quanto scritto qui non si riferisce ad helm, perche' e' un flag che si usa a riga di comando, oppure sbaglio?

* **Cx**: physical Cluster (e.g. Cluster 1).
* **Px**: Pod (e.g., Pod 1).
* **Sx**: Service (e.g., a Cluster IP service), pointing to one or more pods. Given the nature of Liqo, the service endpoints associated to this service can be pods in either clusters.
* **Ix**: Internet connectivity. For instance, I1 is the Internet connectivity provided by Cluster 1.
* **Virtual cluster**: refers to the combination of a physical cluster along with all its extensions in other clusters, which are created with Liqo. A virtual cluster includes all the physical resources of the local cluster, and all the resources it borrows from the remote cluster.
* **Offloaded namespace**: namespace that is expanded across the virtual cluster, enabling the seamless utilization of resources beyond the physical cluster boundaries. An offloaded namespace does not include all the resources of the local cluster, but only the resources belonging to the namespace that has been offloaded (in both local and remote cluster).

Furthermore, yellow cells in the connectivity matrices highlight the differences compared to the default behaviour (i.e., _full pod-to-pod_ connectivity).

## Security modes

> Liqo provides two security modes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Liqo provides two security modes:
- full pod-to-pod connectivity (default mode)
- intra-cluster traffic segregation
```

### Full pod-to-pod connectivity (default mode)

> In this mode, no restrictions are enforced in terms of connectivity, and all pods of the local cluster can connect to all pods of the remote cluster (and vice versa), for all namespaces including non-offloaded ones.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This mode does not enforce any restriction in terms of connectivity, and all pods of the local cluster can connect to all pods of the remote cluster (and vice versa), for all namespaces including non-offloaded ones.
```

> This mode can be useful when the clusters trust each other (and/or belong to the same administrative domain) and there is no need to restrict the connectivity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This mode can be useful when the clusters trust each other (and/or belong to the same administrative domain) and there is no need to restrict the connectivity.
This may happen when both clusters are under control of the same organization, and Liqo is used simply to "cross the boundaries" among distinct clusters (e.g., because clusters are running in different geographical regions), providing a single point of control for many geographically distributed clusters.
```

* **P5**: pod in cluster C2, not belonging to the offloaded namespace; this pod has no relationships with cluster C1 and it is in full control from cluster C2.

In addition, three services (e.g., ClusterIP) are present, with different characteristics:

* **S1**: service under the control of cluster C1, not belonging to the offloaded namespace.
* **S2**: service under the control of cluster C1, belonging to the offloaded namespace (hence reflected also in C2).
* **S3**: service under the control of cluster C2, not belonging to the offloaded namespace.

Considering two clusters (C1 and C2) in which the former has started a peering toward the latter, and C1 is using some physical resources on the remote cluster C2, the following picture and table show the connectivity provided by Liqo to each pod when trying to connect to resources (other pods, services, and Internet connectivity) present in either one of the two clusters.

```{figure} /_static/images/usage/security-modes/security-modes-schema.drawio.svg
---
align: center
---

```

```{figure} /_static/images/usage/security-modes/matrix-full-p2p.drawio.svg
---
align: center
---

```

### Intra-cluster traffic segregation

> In this mode, the full pod-to-pod connectivity is allowed only within each physical cluster, e.g., all pods in the local cluster can talk to each other, and the same holds for all pods in the remote cluster irrespective of the namespace they belong to or whether they are offloaded or not. With respect to the intra-cluster traffic, the local cluster can contact only its offloaded pods, while the remote cluster is allowed to contact only the _services_ offloaded on it. This mode can be used when the local cluster aims to limit the remote cluster's connectivity solely to offloaded services, preventing direct interaction with the offloaded pods.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This mode allows the full pod-to-pod connectivity only within each _physical_ cluster, e.g., all pods in the local cluster can talk to each other, and the same holds for all pods in the remote cluster irrespective of the namespace they belong to or whether they are offloaded or not.
With respect to the intra-cluster traffic, the local cluster can contact only its offloaded pods, while the remote cluster is allowed to contact only the _services_ offloaded on it. This mode can be used when the local cluster aims to limit the remote cluster's connectivity solely to offloaded services, preventing direct interaction with the offloaded pods.
```

Using the same rules and conventions already presented for the previous case (_full pod-to-pod_ connectivity), the following figure and table presents the connectivity provided by Liqo in this case:

```{figure} /_static/images/usage/security-modes/security-modes-schema.drawio.svg
---
align: center
---

```

```{figure} /_static/images/usage/security-modes/matrix-traffic-segregation.drawio.svg
---
align: center
---

```

## Selection of the security mode

> The desired security mode can be selected setting a **flag** at install time (see the [reference](/installation/install.md)):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The desired security mode can be selected by setting a **flag** at install time (see the [reference](/installation/install.md)):
```

* **S3**: service under the control of cluster C2, not belonging to the offloaded namespace.

Considering two clusters (C1 and C2) in which the former has started a peering toward the latter, and C1 is using some physical resources on the remote cluster C2, the following picture and table show the connectivity provided by Liqo to each pod when trying to connect to resources (other pods, services, and Internet connectivity) present in either one of the two clusters.

```{figure} /_static/images/usage/security-modes/security-modes-schema.drawio.svg
---
align: center
---

```

```{figure} /_static/images/usage/security-modes/matrix-full-p2p.drawio.svg
---
align: center
---

```

### Intra-cluster traffic segregation

This mode allows the full pod-to-pod connectivity only within each _physical_ cluster, e.g., all pods in the local cluster can talk to each other, and the same holds for all pods in the remote cluster irrespective of the namespace they belong to or whether they are offloaded or not.
With respect to the intra-cluster traffic, the local cluster can contact only its offloaded pods, while the remote cluster is allowed to contact only the _services_ offloaded on it.

> This mode can be used when the local cluster wants to extend its full pod-to-pod connectivity with pods and services in the offloaded namespace running in the remote cluster, while it wants to limit the remote cluster's connectivity solely to offloaded services, preventing direct interaction with the offloaded pods.

Reviewer 2: I cannot understand exactly here.
The sentence says "preventing direct interaction with the offloaded pods". However, the picture shows that P5 (in cluster C2) can contact P4 (pod offloaded by C1). So, either the sentence is imprecise, or the table is wrong.
Comments?

Author: The table is right and sentence imprecise.
```suggestion
This mode allows the full pod-to-pod connectivity only within each _physical_ cluster, e.g., all pods in the local cluster can talk to each other, and the same holds for all pods in the remote cluster irrespective of the namespace they belong to or whether they are offloaded or not.
With respect to the intra-cluster traffic, the local cluster can contact only its offloaded pods, while the remote cluster is allowed to contact only the _services_ offloaded on it.
This mode can be used when the local cluster wants to extend its full pod-to-pod connectivity with pods and services in the offloaded namespace running in the remote cluster, while it wants to limit the remote cluster's connectivity solely to offloaded services and related backend pods, preventing interaction with local pods that are not engaged in the multi-cluster topology.
```

Using the same rules and conventions already presented for the previous case (_full pod-to-pod_ connectivity), the following figure and table shows the connectivity provided by Liqo in this case:

```{figure} /_static/images/usage/security-modes/security-modes-schema.drawio.svg
---
align: center
---

```

```{figure} /_static/images/usage/security-modes/matrix-traffic-segregation.drawio.svg
---
align: center
---

```

## Selection of the security mode

> The desired security mode can be selected by setting a **flag** at install time (see the [reference](/installation/install.md)):

Reviewer 2: I cannot find any documented option in Helm.
Am I right?
Is the command line the only way to configure those settings?

Author: Security mode can also be selected editing Helm values file.

> The desired security mode can be selected by setting a **flag** at install time (see the [reference](/installation/install.md)):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The desired security mode can be selected by setting a **flag** at install time or by setting the proper Heml value.
More details are provided in the [Install page](/installation/install.md)).
```

```{figure} /_static/images/usage/security-modes/security-modes-schema.drawio.svg
---
align: center
---

```

```{figure} /_static/images/usage/security-modes/matrix-full-p2p.drawio.svg
---
align: center
---

```

### Intra-cluster traffic segregation

This mode allows the full pod-to-pod connectivity only within each _physical_ cluster, e.g., all pods in the local cluster can talk to each other, and the same holds for all pods in the remote cluster irrespective of the namespace they belong to or whether they are offloaded or not.
With respect to the intra-cluster traffic, the local cluster can contact only its offloaded pods, while the remote cluster is allowed to contact only the _services_ offloaded on it.
This mode allows the full pod-to-pod connectivity only within each _physical_ cluster, e.g., all pods in the local cluster can talk to each other, and the same holds for all pods in the remote cluster irrespective of the namespace they belong to or whether they are offloaded or not.

> In addition, the remote cluster is also allowed to contact the _services_ offloaded on it (e.g., P5 --> S2), and the local cluster can contact all its offloaded pods (e.g., P1 --> P4, but not vice versa). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition, the remote cluster is also allowed to contact the _services_ offloaded on it (e.g., P5 --> S2), and the local cluster can contact all its offloaded pods (e.g., P1 --> P4, but not vice versa).
```
